.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 Hellmuth Michaelis. All rights reserved.
.\" Copyright (c) 2002-2005 Hans Petter Selasky. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/usr.sbin/i4b/man/ihfc.4,v 1.7 2001/07/15 08:01:59 dd Exp $
.\"
.Dd Jun 16, 2005
.Dt IHFC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ihfc
.Nd ISDN device driver for ISA-, PnP-, PCI- and USB- devices
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device ihfc"
.
.
.de device_hint_file
.Xr /boot/device.hints 5
..
.de isa_card
.Ss \\$2
.\" (#\\$1)
.Pp
Example of configuration lines needed in
.device_hint_file
:
..
.de ind_start
.Pp
.Bd -literal -offset indent -compact
..
.de ind_end
.Ed
.Pp
..
.
.
.
.
.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Bd -filled
The
.Nm
driver provides D-channel layer 1 supports as specified 
in ITU Recommendation I.430 and layer 1 support for the
B-channels.
.Ed
.
.
.Sh SUPPORTED CHIPS
.
.Bd -literal
AM79C3X     - AMD (AdvancedMicroDevices)
HFC-2B      - Colognechip
HFC-2BDS0   - Colognechip
HFC-E1      - Colognechip
HSCX 82525  - Siemens
IPAC v1.x   - Siemens
ISAC 2085   - Siemens
ISAC 2086   - Siemens
ISAC 2186   - Siemens
Tiger300    - Tiger Jet Network Inc.
Tiger320    - Tiger Jet Network Inc.
W6692x      - Winbond
W6694x      - Winbond
.Ed
.
.
.
.
.Sh SUPPORTED DEVICES: ISA bus, NON-PnP
.Bd -filled
ISA devices must be identified by manually adding `hints' to the
.device_hint_file
file. Below are some examples of what the `hints' should look
like. `hints' are used by the drivers to figure out what resources a
device requires. Be aware that some drivers might allocate more I/O
ports than specified. The reason for only having to specify one I/O
port, is that it makes configuration easier for the users.
.Ed
.
.
.
.Ss DESCRIPTION of device flags
.Bd -filled
For each hint there is a 32-bit unsigned integer called flag, that the
.Nm
driver can check. The bits are used like this:
.Ed
.
.ind_start
bits[0....7] = 0x10  (card number - see below)
bits[8...15] = 0x32  (unused)
bits[16..19] = 0x4   (internal IRQ selection, if set)
bits[20..31] = 0x765 (internal I/O selection, if set)
 
Using hex these bits become:
 
0x765 4 32 10 = 0x76543210
 
Example:
 
hint.ihfc.8.flags = "0x76543210"
.ind_end
.
.Bd -filled
Hints with low unit numbers might be overwritten, if PCI devices are
present. Therefore one should give the hints a higher unit number,
for example 8.
.Ed
.
.
.
.isa_card "0" "TELEINT ISDN SPEED No.1 (HFC-2B)"
.ind_start
hint.ihfc.8.at      ="isa"
hint.ihfc.8.port    ="0x300" # check jumper setting
hint.ihfc.8.flags   ="0x0A"
#
# valid I/O ports: 0x300, 0x330, 0x278 and 0x2e8 
# (check jumper setting)
#
# IRQ is selected automatically by
# the driver, if not specified.
#
# valid IRQ values are: 3, 4, 5, 7, 10 and 11.
#
.ind_end
.
.
.
.isa_card "1" "Custom HFC-2B with ISAC co-chip"
.ind_start
hint.ihfc.8.at      ="isa"
hint.ihfc.8.port    ="0x200" # check jumper setting
hint.ihfc.8.irq     ="0x3"   # check jumper setting
hint.ihfc.8.flags   ="0x20030001"
#
# NOTE: must specify a valid internal IRQ and
# internal I/O-base in flags.
#
.ind_end
.
.
.
.isa_card "2" "Custom HFC-2BDS0"
.ind_start
hint.ihfc.8.at      ="isa"
hint.ihfc.8.port    ="0x200" # check jumper setting
hint.ihfc.8.irq     ="0x3"   # check jumper setting
hint.ihfc.8.flags   ="0x20030002"
#
# NOTE: must specify a valid internal IRQ and
# internal I/O-base in flags.
#
.ind_end
.
.
.
.isa_card "3" "Teles S0/8, Dr. Neuhaus Niccy 1008, Creatix ISDN-S0/8"
.ind_start
hint.ihfc.8.at      ="isa"
hint.ihfc.8.maddr   ="0xd0000"
hint.ihfc.8.irq     ="5"
hint.ihfc.8.flags   ="0x0F"
#
# valid memory range is from 0xA0000 to 0xDF000 inclusivly.
# A region of 4kB of memory will be allocated
# from the start of the specified address.
#
# valid IRQ values are: 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7.
#
# NOTE: this card does not require any I/O port
# to be specified
.ind_end
.
.
.
.isa_card "4" "Teles S0/16, Creatix ISDN-S0, Dr. Neuhaus Niccy 1016"
.ind_start
hint.ihfc.8.at      ="isa"
hint.ihfc.8.port    ="0xd80" # check jumper setting
hint.ihfc.8.maddr   ="0xd0000"
hint.ihfc.8.irq     ="5"
hint.ihfc.8.flags   ="0x11"
#
# valid I/O ports: 0xd80, 0xe80 and 0xf80.
# 
# valid memory start addresses:
# 0xC0000, 0xC2000, 0xC4000, 0xC6000, 
# 0xC8000, 0xCA000, 0xCC000, 0xCE000,
# 0xD0000, 0xD2000, 0xD4000, 0xD6000, 
# 0xD8000, 0xDA000, 0xDC000, 0xDE000.
#
# valid IRQ values are: 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 11, 12 and 15.
#
# NOTE: IRQ and memory base is programmed using
# the selected I/O port.
#
# NOTE: Although the jumpers are labeled 0xd80, 0xe80 and 0xf80,
# I/O space at addresses 0x180, 0x280 or 0x380 is also required.
#
.ind_end
.
.
.
.
.isa_card "5" "Teles S0/16.3"
.ind_start
hint.ihfc.8.at      ="isa"
hint.ihfc.8.port    ="0xd80" # check jumper setting
hint.ihfc.8.irq     ="5"
hint.ihfc.8.flags   ="0x10"
#
# valid I/O ports are: 0xd80, 0xe80 or 0xf80.
#
# valid IRQ values are: 2, 5, 9, 10, 12 and 15.
#
# NOTE: IRQ is programmed using the selected I/O port.
#
# NOTE: Although the switch positions are labeled 
# 0x180, 0x280 and 0x380, the card is to be configured 
# at 0xd80, 0xe80 or 0xf80 respectively!
.ind_end
.
.
.
.isa_card "6" "AVM A1 and AVM Fritz!Card"
.ind_start
hint.ihfc.8.at      ="isa"
hint.ihfc.8.port    ="0x340" # check jumper setting
hint.ihfc.8.irq     ="5"
hint.ihfc.8.flags   ="0x0D"
#
# valid I/O ports are: 0x200, 0x240, 0x300 and 0x340
#
# valid IRQ values are: 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12 and 15.
#
# NOTE: Older versions of the AVM A1 also require setting 
# of an IRQ jumper, newer versions of this card and the 
# Fritz!Card only have an I/O base jumper and the IRQ 
# selection is programmed by the driver.
#
.ind_end
.
.
.
.isa_card "7" "USRobotics Sportster ISDN TA intern and Stollmann Tina pp"
.ind_start
hint.ihfc.8.at      ="isa"
hint.ihfc.8.port    ="0x268"
hint.ihfc.8.irq     ="5"
hint.ihfc.8.flags   ="0x12"
#
# valid I/O ports: 0x200, 0x208, 0x210, 0x218,
#                  0x220, 0x228, 0x230, 0x238, 
#                  0x240, 0x248, 0x250, 0x258,
#                  0x260, 0x268, 0x270, 0x278.
#
# valid IRQ values: 5, 7, 10, 11, 12, 14, and 15.
#
# NOTE: this card has a strange address decoding scheme 
# resulting in occupying 64 windows of some bytes length
# over the whole I/O address range.
#
.ind_end
.
.
.
.isa_card "8" "ITK ix1 Micro ( < V.3, non-PnP version )"
.ind_start
hint.ihfc.8.at      ="isa"
hint.ihfc.8.port    ="0x398"
hint.ihfc.8.irq     ="10"
hint.ihfc.8.flags   ="0x13"
#
# valid I/O ports: unknown
#
# valid IRQ values: unknown
#
.ind_end
.
.
.
.isa_card "9" "ELSA MicroLink ISDN/PCC-16 and ELSA PCFpro"
.ind_start
hint.ihfc.8.at      ="isa"
hint.ihfc.8.port    ="0x360"
hint.ihfc.8.irq     ="10"
hint.ihfc.8.flags   ="0x0E"
#
# valid I/O ports: 0x160, 0x170, 0x260 and 0x360.
#
# valid IRQ values: 2, 3, 5, 10, 11 and 15.
#
# The LED's are not supported and are off.
#
.ind_end
.
.
.
.Sh SUPPORTED DEVICES: PnP bus, PCI bus and USB
.Bd -filled
These devices are identified automatically. See
.Xr pnpinfo 8 ,
.Xr pciconf 8
or
.Xr usbdevs 8
for more information.
.Ed
.
.
.
.Ss HFC - based devices
.
.Bd -literal 
AcerISDN P10
Asuscom ISDNLink P-IN100-ST-D2
Bewan ISDN USB TA
Bewan Modem RNIS USB
Billion ISDN tiny USB modem
Billion USB TA 2
DrayTec ISDN USB
DrayTek USB ISDN TA (MiniVigor)
HFC-2BDS0 ISA/PnP/PCI/USB ISDN
HFC-E1 PCI ISDN
Motorola MC145575
OliTec ISDN USB
OliTec Modem RNIS USB V2
Stollmann USB TA
Teles S0/16.3c PnP
Telewell
Trust ISDN
Twister ISDN TA
Xplorer 500
Zoltrix Speedier 128K PCI
.Ed
.
.Ss ISAC - based devices
.
.Bd -literal 
Asuscom ISDNlink 128K ISA
AVM A1
AVM Fritz!Card
AVM Fritz!Card PnP
AVM Fritz!Card PCI
Compaq Microcom 610 (Compaq series PSB2222I)
Creatix ISDN-S0 P&P
Creatix S0/16 PnP
Dr.Neuhaus Niccy Go@
Dynalink IS64PH
ELSA MicroLink ISDN/PCI
ELSA QuickStep 1000pro ISA
ELSA QuickStep 1000pro PCI
Eicon.Diehl DIVA 2.0 ISA PnP
Eicon.Diehl DIVA 2.02 ISA PnP
ITK ix1 Micro V3.0
MultiTech MT128SA
Sedlbauer Win Speed
Siemens I-Surf 2.0 PnP
Teles S0/16.3 PnP
.Ed
.
.Ss Tiger300/320 - based devices
.
.Bd -literal 
NETjet-S PCI ISDN
Teles PCI-TJ
.Ed
.
.Ss Winbond - based devices
.
.Bd -literal 
Asuscom ISDNLink P-IN100-ST-D
Asuscom ISDNLink TA-280-ST-W (USB)
Dynalink IS64PPH
Planet PCI ISDN Adapter (IA128P-STDV)
 
 . . . and compatible devices with the supported chips.
 
.Ed
.
.Pp
.
.
.
.Sh PERFORMANCE
.Bd -filled
This driver [sometimes] uses HDLC encoding and decoding in software, to
limit the interrupt rate and to improve data recovery in flooding
situations.  At the writing moment only one chip has hardware support
for that, which is the W6694. The support is in the form of holding
back duplicate `flag bytes' when they occur.
.Ed
.
.
.
.Sh TROUBLESHOOTING
.Bd -filled
.Pp
1) Make sure that the ISDN cable is properly connected. Re-plug it one time.
.Pp
2) If
.Xr isdnd 8
is running try "killall -kill isdnd ; isdnd".
.Pp
.\" 2) Try isdndebug -u xxx -r
.\"
.Pp
3) Some times it is necessary to activate the ISDN line in manual.
This can be done by lifting off a receiver connected to your terminal,
wait some seconds and then hangup. New devices should be properly
recognized and activated now.
.Pp
4) Some times the KERNEL may assign a shared interrupt to a PnP/ISA
device or there may be undetected hardware using the assigned IRQ. In
these cases the IRQ may not work at all or it may just work for a
while. To work around this the Colognechip based devices can be switched
to polled mode.  Please see `polled mode` in
.Xr isdndebug 8
manual.
.Pp
5) If the the Winbond chips have been without power for a long time,
they will start sending garbage to the S0-bus for around 16 seconds.
.Ed
.
.
.
.Sh SOME FACTS ABOUT ISDN
.Bd -filled
ISDN is a short for Integrated Services Digital Network.
.Pp
The power required to drive an ISDN chip is less than 20-50mA at +5V,
which is about the power you can receive from a good 30x15cm solar
cell on a sunny day.
.Pp
The distance which ISDN is able to carry a signal, is long. Without
amplification two devices can be connected at distance 1km, given that
the total attenuation is less than 6dB at 96 kHz. 6dB means a factor
of 4.0. If more than two devices should be connected the distance must
be somewhat shorter. The maximum number of devices that can be
connected to the same cable is 8, due to the effect of signal
canceling. (see recommendation V.230)
.Ed
.
.
.
.Sh CONNECTING TWO OR MORE BRI ISDN DEVICES
.Bd -filled
Building the crossover cable that is needed to connect two or more
ISDN devices, is simple:
.Ed
.
.ind_start
You need two RJ45's and a 4-wire, twisted, copper cable.
The wiring is like this:

 RJ45 -               RJ45 -
 Network, NT          Terminals, TE's
 +----+               +----+
 |---A0               B0---|
 |---A1               B1---|        R1
 |---A2-----a  b------B2------------------+         R2
 |---A3----b    a-----B3--------- -  -  - | -  - -------+
 |---A4----c    d-----B4--------- -  -  - | [68-100 Ohm]+
 |---A5-----d  c------B5-----[68-100 Ohm]-+
 |---A6               B6---|
 |---A7               B7---|
 +----+               +----+

pin A2 is connected to pin B3
pin A3 is connected to pin B2
pin A4 is connected to pin B5
pin A5 is connected to pin B4

NOTE: the other pins are not used

A 68-100 Ohm resistor shorts pin B2 and B5
A 68-100 Ohm resistor shorts pin B3 and B4

.ind_end
.
.Bd -filled
If this cable is to be used outdoors it can be worth adding two 50mA
fast blow fuses in series with "a" and "b" at each end, in case of
lightning. For more information about how to set NT-mode please see
the
.Xr isdndebug 8 ,
.Xr isdnconfig 8
and
.Xr isdnd.rc 5
manuals. NOTE: At the writing moment only HFC-based devices support
NT-mode.
.Ed
.
.
.Sh BUYING A NEW ISDN DEVICE
.Bd -filled
If you want to buy a new ISDN device the "HFC-2BDS0/E1 ISA/PnP/PCI/USB
ISDN" based devices are a good choice. These devices are usually somewhat
cheaper than the others and support connecting two or more ISDN devices
using the crossover cable described earlier.
.Ed
.
.
.
.\" .Sh CAVEATS
.
.
.
.Sh BUGS
Some devices might not work properly due to missing hardware 
documentation from the manufacturer.
.
.
.
.Sh FILES
/dev/ihfc
.
.
.
.Sh STANDARDS
CCITT Recommendation I.430
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr i4b 4 ,
.Xr i4bdss1 4 ,
.Xr isdndebug 8 ,
.Xr isdnconfig 8 ,
.Xr pciconf 8 ,
.Xr pnpinfo 8 ,
.Xr usbdevs 8 ,
.Xr vmstat 8
.
.
.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Hans Petter Selasky Aq hselasky@c2i.net .
.Pp
Tiger300/320 support was initially written by
.An Sergio de Souza Prallon Aq prallon@tmp.com.br
.Pp
W6692 support was initially written by
.An Dave Boyce Aq dave@abyss.demon.co.uk
.Pp
This manpage was initially written by
.An Hellmuth Michaelis Aq hm@FreeBSD.org
